---
title: RISM
layout: home
lang: en
permalink: /index.html
---

Francesco Pollini (1762–1846) was an amateur composer, tenor, pianist, and fortepiano teacher who received his education in Vienna in the 1780s, where he met Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Born in Ljubljana, after his early education in his hometown and in the capital of the Empire, he moved to Milan around 1793, where he settled permanently. There he was active as a teacher and composer, producing an influential piano method and a substantial number of works for piano, vocal chamber music, but also – in the first twenty years of his artistic life – large-scale sacred music and dramatic works.  

In the early 19th century, Pollini began publishing his works in Paris, Vienna and Zurich. However, most of Pollini's compositions were published in Milan after Giulio Ricordi founded his publishing house. Almost all printed sources are preserved in the Library of the Milan Conservatory (I-Mc), and many also in Vienna, in the library of the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde (A-Wgm). In 1850, Antonio Gasparini, Pollini's nephew and a doctor at the Milan Conservatory, donated all the music he still had from his uncle and aunt's house – Pollini and his second wife, the harpist Marianna Gasparini, had no children – to the Conservatory library, including a substantial amount of Pollini's autographs.  

An overview of Pollini's work entails an assessment of his achievements and allows us to identify his personality in the context of the professional strategies of a musician of his time: as a teacher, composer and performer. However, due to his family's activities (his father had invented a medicine for syphilis, “Pollini's waters”), he was not dependent on income from the world of music. Assessing Pollini's compositional work, his life strategies and his self-understanding as a musician also allows us to investigate concepts of nationality in the instrumental music of the period. The first Italian piano school, from the late 18th century to the early 19th century, descended from the Viennese classical piano school: in this context, Pollini represents the ideal bridge between tradition and the new virtuosity of the 1830s.  

The publication of Pollini's thematic catalogue is part of the results of research carried out within the project [Francesco Pollini and the early Italian piano tradition](https://www.hkb-interpretation.ch/projekte/francesco-pollini-and-the-early-italian-piano-tradition) (Swiss National Science Foundation, no. [182222](https://data.snf.ch/grants/grant/182222), 2019-2022). The individual entries were created using Muscat software, the RISM database tool, and the publication was made possible thanks to the RISM Digital Centre in Bern.  

## Introduction {#Intro}

The thematic catalogue is usually one of the most important references for the work of artists and for their documented compositions: its usefulness for research and for the public is undeniable. Interest in the pianist and composer Francesco Pollini (1762-1846), which intensified in the 1990s thanks mainly to studies by musicologists in Italy and Slovenia, more than justifies the compilation of a catalogue of his works.  

In 1969, Gilda Grigolato was the first to describe the history of Pollini's collection, which arrived at the library of the Milan Conservatory in 1850, listing the manuscripts preserved there in an appendix and resolving a case of homonymy with a younger Francesco Pollini (1832–1871) from Mendrisio, Switzerland. A partial thematic catalogue, containing only the works for piano, was compiled in Joseph Kotylo's thesis in 1972. The printed editions preserved in Italy were listed in the appendix to an article by Elena Biggi Parodi published in 1996. The list of works published by the same author in the New Grove includes all musical genres and all types of sources but presents only a selection of compositions.  

As regards the opus numbers assigned by the composer to his publications, twelve numbers are missing between Op. 13, A.16, from 1809, and Op. 26, A.17, from 1812. No explanation has been found for this gap, and it is unlikely that such a large number of publications could have been lost. Later on, only the opus numbers 27, 35-36, 38, 46 and 52 are missing. Pollini, however, also published compositions without opus numbers, perhaps considered more occasional and less demanding.  

While it is possible in most cases to date the printed editions by referring to publishers' catalogues or press announcements, there are few reference points for undated manuscripts. A first clue may be the title preceding the composer's name. In Vienna, Pollini bore the noble title of baron, inherited from his father. Mozart also calls him baron in the two replacement numbers of Idomeneo written for him in 1786. We can therefore consider the term “baron Pollini” to support a dating back to the *ancien régime*, if not to his Viennese years. With the founding of the Cisalpine Republic, however, Pollini began to be referred to as “citizen”, in accordance with revolutionary custom. After 1805, with the Kingdom of Italy, the name Francesco Pollini appeared without any titles, or at most preceded by a modest “signore”.  

Musical sources containing Pollini's compositions are scattered across more than one hundred different libraries throughout Europe, as well as in some in the United States. In total, there are just under five hundred copies of printed editions and more than two hundred manuscripts. His fame is based mainly on the success of certain editions: more than 30 copies of the *Metodo*, F.201, and the six sonatas op. 26, A.19a-f, have been preserved, and more than twenty copies of the *Variations & rondeaux* A.7 and the toccata op. 42 A.31. The national libraries of Paris and London hold many much rarer printed titles, reflecting the rich publishing activity in the two capitals. However, the two main collections in terms of number and importance are preserved in the two centres where Pollini was active as a musician and most appreciated as such: in the Conservatorio ‘G. Verdi’ library in Milan, thanks in particular to the bequest of Antonio Gasparini, Marianna Pollini's nephew, and in the archives of the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde in Vienna. A list of sources for Francesco Pollini's known compositions, as complete as possible, is available on [Zenodo](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7021701).  

## Biographical note {#Bio} 

Francesco Pollini was born in Ljubljana on 26 March 1762 to Johann Chrysostomus, Baron Pollini, and Maria Elisabetta Posarelli, and died in Milan on 17 September 1846.  

We know nothing specific about Pollini's musical education. He was probably introduced to music at a young age, through his family and friends who were connected to the Zois family. After moving to Vienna, he met W.A. Mozart and performed as a tenor in private performances of Mozart's music (a teacher-student relationship suggested in Pollini's obituary is not substantiated by contemporary documents). In Vienna, he married Josepha von Bernrieder in 1788, who died only four years later. By 1791, his musical education had already reached such a level that he could describe himself, if only jokingly, as a “maître de chapelle” when signing a thank-you note sent to an unknown recipient. His first experiments as a composer probably date back to this period, while he was still in Vienna. Although the foundations for Pollini's career were laid by his musical experiences in Ljubljana, Vienna and during his grand tour as a young man, he only began to work regularly and document his work as a composer after moving permanently to Milan around 1793.  

In Milan, he met his second wife, Marianna Gasparini, whom he married in 1799, and probably through her also Niccolò Zingarelli, who became his composition teacher. Zingarelli, after returning to Naples, later recommended the young Vincenzo Bellini to his two Milanese friends, and he remained always grateful to the Pollinis for the support they offered him during his stay in Milan and bound to them by affectionate friendship.

Pollini's artistic production can be divided into two periods of about twenty years each. The first twenty years – from his early compositions to the *Metodo* (F.201) and the six sonatas op. 26 (A.19) – was Pollini's experimental period, during which he wrote in a wide variety of genres and for different ensembles, also trying his hand at dramatic compositions for the theatre and sacred works for the liturgy. His very brief theatrical experiment was limited to a period of four years (1798–1801). In the years after 1812, he wrote only compositions intended for private listening or for the limited audience of salons and noble academies, most of which were published by Ricordi.

The publication of musical works by a composer working in Milan in the early decades of the 19th century – a particularly vibrant period in the history of music publishing – reveals a complex network of commercial and clientelistic relationships. Starting with his first experiences outside Italy, the author began a twenty-year collaboration with Ricordi in 1812. Sporadic foreign editions only interrupted this relationship in appearance: most of them were unauthorised pirate editions, while for some it can be assumed that there was an agreement between Ricordi and his colleagues (especially German ones) to produce parallel editions in their respective countries.  

The dedicatees reveal a dense network of family and social relationships. In most cases, the dedications on the printed works reflect a relationship between teacher and (mostly female) pupil.  

Production in genres and for instruments other than solo piano gradually declined until it disappeared completely in the early 1820s (as far as can be gleaned from dated compositions). In the last decade of his life, Pollini, now over seventy, stopped composing altogether. We have no way of knowing the reasons for this; we can only speculate that he found it difficult to keep up with the evolution of style (his last publication, Op. 58, A.47, from 1833, preceded Liszt's visit to Milan by only a few years) or that he was simply tired of old age.  

Although he had stopped composing, Pollini's fame as a pianist and composer remained alive. This is evidenced by the sincere appreciation of such diverse personalities as Michail Glinka, Franz Liszt and Robert Schumann.

## A. Piano works {#sectionA}  

Given the vastness of his output in this field, its distribution throughout the composer's artistic life and the importance of its reception, it is undeniable that Francesco Pollini was, first and foremost, a composer of works for piano. It is true that his compositions also cover various other genres: instrumental chamber music, sacred music and musical theatre, but his experimentation in these fields remains, all things considered, episodic.

The corpus of Pollini's piano compositions that has come down to us is quite substantial. Thirty-nine publications have been identified with various European publishers, with and without opus numbers. His manuscript compositions include 32 sonatas with one or more movements (most of them unpublished) and some album leaves. 

Pollini's first creative phase, which lasted from around 1789 to 1812 and coincided with his final years in Vienna, his permanent move to Milan and his first publishing successes, produced the 32 sonatas with one or more movements that have come down to us in manuscript form (FPC A.1-2, 6, 8-9, 17-18, 48-60, 62-73), and his first publications with or without opus numbers (A.3-5, 7, 10-16) up to the sonatas op. 26 (A.19) annexed to the *Method* (F.201). The second phase covers the following twenty years, from 1812 to 1834, and is characterised by the production of variations, rondos, fantasies on opera themes and toccatas, published almost exclusively by Ricordi. The sonatas Op. 26 act as a bridge between these two periods: on the one hand, they represent the culmination of Pollini's sonata writing and the last cycle he dedicated to this instrumental genre; on the other, they mark the beginning of his long-lasting collaboration with Ricordi.

## B. Other instrumental works {#sectionB}  

There are only about ten compositions for instruments other than the piano. Most of these are linked to the harp, an instrument played by his second wife, Marianna Gasparini. Chronologically, they range from the *Air varié pour la harpe* (B.74) published by the Érard sisters in 1802 – one of Pollini's very first publications – to the *Sonata facile per cembalo od arpa con violino obbligato* op. 33 (B.77) published by Ricordi in 1817. It is easy to imagine Marianna and Francesco playing together the *Grande sonate, caprice et variations for harp and piano* of 1807 (B.75). Two sonatas for violin and piano remain undated and are preserved in manuscript form (B.78, B.83).

## C. Chamber vocal music {#sectionC}  

Vocal chamber music is a multifaceted genre (for one, two, up to five voices – among the lost compositions – with or without piano accompaniment) and predominantly private, but not necessarily secondary. While some songs are undoubtedly undemanding from a compositional and aesthetic point of view, all of them reflect Pollini's network of personal and cultural relationships through their textual and intertextual choices. His vocal chamber music production can thus be seen as the product of multiple collaborations.  
The large number of secular chamber songs saw the light at different moments in his life. The confirmed dates range from 1803, for the *Tre canzonette* (C.85) published by Nägeli in Zurich, to 1823, for the sonnet *Vile un pensier mi dice* published by Ricordi (C.96).

## D. Vocal and orchestral works {#sectionD}

The only musical theatre composition by Pollini performed in a public theatre was *La casetta nel bosco* (D.167) in 1798. The following year, Pollini composed the cantata *Il genio insubre* (D.169), and in 1801, the cantata *Il trionfo della pace* (D.173) was finally performed at La Scala, of which only the libretto has been preserved. While the 1799 cantata celebrated the return of the Austrians in April of that year, the one performed on 30 April 1801 celebrated, with the opposite political orientation, the Treaty of Lunéville of the previous February between the Cisalpine Republic and the Austrian Empire and the laying of the foundation stone of the Foro Buonaparte. Pollini was commissioned by the Ministry of the Interior to compose *Trionfo della pace*.  

While *La casetta nel bosco* was performed at the Canobbiana theatre, extensive excerpts from *Ines de Castro* D.175 (a duet and a sextet), *Il ripudio fortunato* D.171 (introduction, duet, two quartets and finale) and *Le convenienze teatrali* D.173 (introduction, aria, trio, quartet and sextet) are probably attributable to private performances in semi-staged or concertante form. Finally, the texts of many individual pieces are borrowed from the librettos of operas performed in Milan in the very years when Pollini was experimenting with large-scale compositions of public resonance. These isolated numbers can perhaps be considered replacement arias for private “academies”, or compositional exercises under the aegis of Zingarelli.  

## E. Sacred music {#sectionE}

Only a few compositions based on Latin liturgical texts are known, conceived to be performed in church during religious services: the Te Deum E.185 and the acclamation Vivat rex (lost), dating from 1805, and the Requiem E.190, undated.  

A sacred genre of a private nature, on the other hand, is the composition of Italian paraphrases of sacred texts, such as the three lamentations dating from 1823 (E.188, E.189 and E.190) and the successful *Stabat mater* by Evasio Leone published in 1821 (E.187). Pollini also set spiritual poems to music, such as the *Via crucis* (E.184), which bears the date 1800 on the autograph, and the sonnet *Io chiedo al ciel* by Giovanni Mario Crescimbeni (E.191).  

## F. Pedagogical works {#sectionF}

Pollini's educational output can essentially be summarised in his *Metodo pel Clavicembalo* F.201 (1812), commissioned by the newly founded Milan Conservatory for use in piano classes. The treatise reveals an aesthetic background that illuminates the points of contact between Pollini's aesthetics and those of the main piano schools of the early 19th century. In the early nineteenth century, the interpretation of touch, rubato and the use of pedals was still, as in the previous century, “intuitive” in nature, i.e. left largely to the performer's understanding. From this perspective, the *Metodo* – the first piano treatise published in Italy and in Italian – has been invaluable to generations of pianists, from its time to the present day. The *Metodo pel Clavicembalo* saw the light of day at a time of great organological changes in the construction of keyboard instruments and great creative ferment in the literature that exploited the rich possibilities offered by the piano. At the same time, there was a sharp increase in the amateur market, which led to a growing demand for instructions on how to play correctly, and the emergence of the first state institutions for music teaching, which required approved teaching texts based on rational principles. 

## G. Appendix {#sectionG}

The appendix contains works considered lost, as recorded in historical catalogues, and Pollini's arrangements of compositions by other composers.

## Bibliography {#Biblio}

The bibliography relating to individual compositions is mentioned in the respective entries. Here is a selection from the general bibliography concerning Francesco Pollini and his compositions. 

### Secondary literature {#Refs}

- Andreacchio, Sara e Bacciagaluppi, Claudio. “Prospettive di ricerca sull’attività compositiva di Francesco Pollini e appunti per un catalogo delle opere”, in: Francesco Pollini e il mondo musicale milanese di primo Ottocento, ed. Claudio Bacciagaluppi, Gabriele Manca, Leonardo Miucci and Claudio Toscani. Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2024, pp. 37–60. 
- Andreacchio, Sara. Francesco Pollini: pianista, compositore e didatta. Uno studio della produzione pianistica sotto la prospettiva delle sue tre personae, PhD thesis, Université de Genève, 2025.  
- Andreacchio, Sara. “Virtuosity in Francesco Pollini’s Piano Works: Issues of Genre, Piano Writing and Performance Practice”, in: Virtuosität und Innovation: Symposium zur Klaviermusik im brillanten Stil, ed. Stephan Lewandowski. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 2025, pp. 155–200.  
- Antolini, Bianca Maria. “Francesco Pollini e i suoi editori: alcune osservazioni”, in: Francesco Pollini e il mondo musicale milanese di primo Ottocento, ed. Claudio Bacciagaluppi, Gabriele Manca, Leonardo Miucci and Claudio Toscani. Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2024, pp. 61–72.  
- Bedina, Katarina. “Klavirske sonate Franca (Francesca) Pollinija”, in: Muzikološki zbornik/Musicological annual, 18 (1982), pp. 43–52.
- Biggi Parodi, Elena. “Il Metodo pel clavicembalo di Francesco Pollini, ossia il primo metodo pubblicato in Italia per il pianoforte”, in: Nuova rivista musicale italiana, 25 (1991), pp. 1–29.
- Biggi Parodi, Elena. „Francesco Pollini e il suo tempo“, in: Nuova rivista musicale italiana, 30 (1996), pp. 332–365.
- Buompastore, Angela. “Francesco Pollini e il mondo aristocratico dell’epoca”, in: Francesco Pollini e il mondo musicale milanese di primo Ottocento, ed. Claudio Bacciagaluppi, Gabriele Manca, Leonardo Miucci and Claudio Toscani. Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2024, pp. 73–114.
- Costa, Henrik. “Ein Porträten-Album aus dem vorigem Jahrhunderte”, in: Mittheilungen des historischen Vereins für Krain, 18 (1863), p. 52.
- Di Nubila, Renato. „Il metodo per pianoforte di Francesco Pollini“, MA thesis, Università di Napoli, 1984.
- Grigolato, Gilda. “Francesco Pollini e i manoscritti delle sue composizioni”, in: Annuario del Conservatorio di Musica “G. Verdi” di Milano, 161 (1968), pp. 205–224.
- Klemenčič, Ivan. “Variacija kot skladateljsko načelo Franca Pollinija \[Variation as principle in the works of Francesco Pollini\]”, in: Muzikološki zbornik 25 (1989), pp. 41-53.
- Klemenčič, Ivan. “Rod in Ljubljanska leta Franca Pollinija \[The lineage and Ljiubljana years of Francesco Pollini\]”, in: Muzikološki zbornik 28 (1992), pp. 73–91.
- Klemenčič, Ivan. “Franc (Francesco) Pollini’s Ancestors and His Early Career in Ljubljana”, in Off-Mozart. Glazbena kultura i ‘mali majstori’ Srednje Europe 1750.-1820. / Musical culture and the ‘Kleinmeister’ of Central Europe 1750-1820, ed. Vjera Katalinić. Musikoloski Zbornici, 3. Zagreb: Croatian Musicological Society, 1995, pp. 139–151.
- Klemenčič, Ivan. “The song creations of Franc Pollini”, in: Zagreb 1094–1994. Zagreb i Hrvatske Zemlje Kao Most Između Srednjoeuropskih i Mediteranskih Glazbenih Kultura : Radovi s Međunarodnog Muzikološkog Skupa Održanog u Zagrebu, Hrvatska, 28.09 – 1.10.1994 = Zagreb and Croatian Lands as a Bridge between Central-European and Mediterranean Musical Cultures : Proceedings of the International Musicological Symposium Held in Zagreb, Croatia, on September 28 – October 1, 1994, ed. Stanislav Tuksar. Zagreb: Croatian Musicological Society, 1998, pp. 319–336.
- Kokole, Metoda. “The Ljubljana Singer and Virtuoso Pianist Francesco Pollini and the Two Key Women of his Youth”, in: Music, Migration and European Culture. Essays in Honour on Vjera Katalinić, edited by Ivano Cavallini, Jolanta Guzy-Pasiak and Harry White (Muzikološki zbornici 22). Zagreb: Hrvatsko muzikološko društvo / Croatian Musicological Society, 2020, pp. 501–518.
- Kokole, Metoda. “Francesco Pollini between Ljubljana and Vienna (1762–1793)”, in: Francesco Pollini e il mondo musicale milanese di primo Ottocento, ed. Claudio Bacciagaluppi, Gabriele Manca, Leonardo Miucci and Claudio Toscani. Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2024, pp. 11–36.
- Kotylo, Joseph A. A thematic catalog of the solo piano music of Francesco Pollini, tesi di laurea, State University of New York at Binghamton, 1972.
- Miucci, Leonardo. “Francesco Pollini (1762-1846): Aggiornamenti biografici e nuovi documenti”, in: Fonti Musicali Italiane, vol. 21 (2017), pp. 165–186.
- Miucci, Leonardo. “Il Metodo pel clavicembalo e il pianismo di Francesco Pollini”, in: Francesco Pollini e il mondo musicale milanese di primo Ottocento, ed. Claudio Bacciagaluppi, Gabriele Manca, Leonardo Miucci and Claudio Toscani. Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2024, pp. 129–150.
- Sala, Massimiliano. “Francesco Pollini: Capostipite della scuola pianistica milanese”, in: Hortus musicus: Trimestrale di musica antica, 1 (2000), pp. 61–63.
- Salvetti, Guido. “Forse non ci fu una ‘scuola pianistica milanese’”, in: Guide-mains : contexte historique et enseignement du pianoforte au XIXe siècle = Klavierspiel und Klavierunterricht im 19. Jahrhundert, ed. Leonardo Miucci, Suzanne Perrin-Goy and Edoardo Torbianelli; with editorial collaboration from Daniel Allenbach and Nathalie Meidhof (Musikforschung der Hochschule der Künste Bern, vol. 11). Schliengen: Argus, 2018, pp. 124–144.
- Salvetti, Guido. “Teoria e pratica pianistica nella Milano di primo Ottocento: Il caso Pollini”, in: Tasti neri e Tasti bianchi. Pianoforte, organo e attività musicale in Italia nel XIX e XX secolo, ed. Anelide Ruggeri and Marco Nascimbene. Lucca: LIM, 2011, pp. 85–96.
- Steffan, Carlida. “Francesco Pollini: musica vocale da camera e reti filarmoniche”, in: Claudio Bacciagaluppi, Gabriele Manca, Leonardo Miucci and Claudio Toscani. Francesco Pollini e il mondo musicale milanese di primo Ottocento. Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2024, pp. 115–128.
- Toscani, Claudio. “Intorno al Metodo per clavicembalo: uno sguardo sulla trattatistica coeva per strumenti da tasto”, in: Francesco Pollini e il mondo musicale milanese di primo Ottocento, ed. Claudio Bacciagaluppi, Gabriele Manca, Leonardo Miucci and Claudio Toscani. Pisa: Edizioni ETS, 2024, pp. 151–164.

### Critical editions {#Eds}

- Miucci, Leonardo (ed.). Metodo per pianoforte = Piano Method \[1812\]. Roma: Società Editrice di Musicologia, 2016.
- Škrjanc, Radovan and Kokole, Metoda (eds.). Tre sonate op. 26. (Monumenta artis musicae Sloveniae, vol. 59). Lubiana: Muzikološki inštitut ZRC SAZU, 2014.